# Accessible Biomedical AI Research

At the intersection of open science and artificial intelligence (AI), we work to
make biomedical research more accessible and AI methodologies more transparent
and effective.

## Mission statement

Our mission is to advance biomedical science by:

1. Making Science Accessible: *We enhance access to scientific knowledge and
computational tools by developing open-source, user-friendly software for
researchers across disciplines.*

2. Understanding AI in Biomedicine: *We critically examine artificial
intelligence techniques—from basic linear models to advanced deep learning—to
understand their strengths and limitations, guiding their effective application
and improvement.*

By combining these synergistic angles, we aim to empower the research community
with the tools and insights needed to drive impactful discoveries in biomedical
science.

## Philosophy

We believe in slo science (pun intended), where we approach problems with a
focus on understanding and sustainability. In today's research landscape, this
can be counterintuitive; however, we believe that the individual's flexibility
to explore without pressure is what makes science great.

**Reproducibility**: If you're doing something that could be useful to others,
they need to be able to reproduce it. If it's not useful to others, why are you
doing it? In the business of code, this usually means packaging and good
documentation.

**Embracing AI**: Generative AI is a tool like any other, with potential,
limitations, and quirks. Like many other tools, understanding applied AI
theoretically is very challenging. Therefore, we embrace AI as a tool in many
aspects of our work, trying to benefit from its time-saving potential while
remaining critical of its outputs, and in this way understanding it better.

**Infrastructure**: Many a day in science is spent doing things manually that
could be automated. Data discovery, preprocessing, cleaning, and integration,
all could be done much more efficiently with dedicated tools.

**Accessibility**: We believe that science should be accessible to everyone. For
instance, you should not require a dedicated knowledge engineer, or even a team,
to build a knowledge graph for your research project.

<!-- shorten and link to dedicated page, add open source considerations, outreach, systemic incentives, academic publishing vs software sustainability, community engagement in the academic setting, falsification perspective -->

## Get involved

Like what we're doing? Want to collaborate, contribute, or looking for a job?
Get in touch!

## How we work

We have noticed that the ideal of open source software is not always aligned
with the reality of academic work. We have created a
[guide](OPEN_SCIENCE_GUIDE.md) to help researchers and developers navigate the
open science landscape.

## People

We are an interdisciplinary team of researchers and developers. Details can be
found on the [overview board](https://github.com/orgs/slolab/projects/2).

## Projects

### The BioCypher ecosystem

We have created the [BioCypher ecosystem](https://github.com/biocypher) to
facilitate access to all aspects of modern knowledge management in biomedicine.
The ecosystem includes a knowledge graph framework—the eponymous
[BioCypher](https://biocypher.org)—and a framework for leveraging large language
models: [BioChatter](https://biochatter.org). The ecosystem was conceived in
collaboration with the [Saez-Rodriguez group](https://saezlab.org) and a
community of developers and scientists.

### Biases in biomedical machine and deep learning

Science improves one model at a time. As the saying goes, "all models are wrong,
but some are useful." We are interested in the biases of biomedical models,
especially machine learning and deep learning models. We ask what makes a model
useful in the current context of biomedical problems: classifying patients,
predicting the effects of perturbations, or aligning gene expression profiles.
We have a particular interest in
[causality](https://www.embopress.org/doi/full/10.1038/s44320-024-00041-w).

### Software sustainability - DFG528753569

DFG project 528753569 is a three-year project funded by the German Research
Foundation (DFG). The project aims to establish a knowledge graph community in
biomedical science. It was conceived in the context of the modernisation of the
popular prior knowledge resource [OmniPath](https://omnipathdb.org) in the
[Saez-Rodriguez group](https://saezlab.org).

### Modernising automated knowledge management - OTAR3088

The OTAR project 3088 is a three-year project funded by the [Open
Targets](https://opentargets.org) organisation. The project aims to modernise
the knowledge management infrastructure of the popular Open Targets Platform,
from the extraction of information from text, via the representation of
knowledge in the form of knowledge graphs, to the integration of knowledge in
downstream machine learning frameworks, including accessibility-improving Large
Language Models.

## Funding

Our group is funded collaboratively by [Helmholtz
Munich](https://helmholtz-muenchen.de) and [The German Centre for Diabetes
Research](https://dzd-ev.de). We are further grateful for the support of the
following organisations:

- [DFG](https://www.dfg.de)
- [Open Targets](https://opentargets.org)
- [Zulip](https://zulip.com)
- [Docker](https://docker.com)

<!--

**Here are some ideas to get you started:**

👩‍💻 Useful resources - where can the community find your docs? Is there anything else the community should know?
🍿 Fun facts - what does your team eat for breakfast?
🧙 Remember, you can do mighty things with the power of [Markdown](https://docs.github.com/github/writing-on-github/getting-started-with-writing-and-formatting-on-github/basic-writing-and-formatting-syntax)
-->
